---
title: Data Collection
layout: default
---

# Progress in Sorting Machine Development

The main drive for this project is to utilize the collected data to
develop a commercializable autonomous sorting machine. This section
outlines our current progress toward achieving two key aspects of the
sorting machine: (1) creating AI models capable of accurately sorting
dates from images and (2) developing an industrial-scale mechanical
sorting machine into which we can integrate these models. These
components are essential to create a scalable and efficient system for
the date fruit industry. The efforts detailed here are ongoing, and we
intend to continue to advance toward achieving these objectives.

## Developing Initial Sorting Models

The development of sorting models is a crucial first step. The primary
attributes of the dates that should be detected are size, color, skin
delamination, and moisture level. The first three Several approaches can
be considered when designing these models:

1\. Classical/handcrafting features: This technique would utilize image
recognition techniques to identify and sort dates based on predefined
characteristics such as shape, color uniformity, and visible defects
(e.g. cracked or separated skin).

2\. Machine Learning models: Machine learning models can also be trained
on datasets of annotated images to detect these features more accurately
over time. These models may also be used to predict other quality
indicators, such as internal texture or moisture content, which might
not be easily detected by the naked eye.

By comparing the accuracy and efficiency of both approaches, we will
select or potentially combine methods to ensure the highest level of
precision in the sorting process.

## Developing Sorting Machine

The industrial sorting machine plays a critical role in translating the
AI models into a practical solution. The goal is to design it to handle
large volumes of dates, ensuring that it can support significant load
capacities and accommodate different sizes of date varieties.

A key requirement is that the machine must operate at high speeds,
ensuring a rapid sorting rate to meet daily production. In addition, the
system must incorporate gentle handling mechanisms to prevent damage to
the dates, minimizing bruising or breakage, which are common issues in
mechanical processing. In addition, the machine should be robust enough
to handle hot temperatures and comply with food safety regulations.

The mechanical system has been fully developed along with the control
systems, and we are currently testing its reliability. The software
models will be integrated to give us a complete industrial solution that
is ready for commercialization.
